Vector Embeddings in Java (#2508)
cap-js/docs: java/cds-data.md

In CAP Java, vectors are represented by the `CdsVector` type, which allows a unified handling of different vector representations such as `float[]` and `String`:

```Java
// Vector embedding of text, for example, from SAP GenAI Hub via SAP Cloud SDK for AI
float[] embedding = embeddingModel.embedding(
        new OpenAiEmbeddingRequest(List.of(text))).getEmbeddingVectors().get(0);

CdsVector v1 = CdsVector.of(embedding); // float[] format
```

In CDS QL queries, elements of type `cds.Vector` are not included in select _all_ queries. They must be explicitly added to the select list:

```Java
CdsVector embedding = service.run(Select.from(INCIDENTS).byId(101)
  .columns(b -> b.embedding())).single(Incident.class).getEmbedding();
```

### Computing Vector Embeddings in SAP HANA (beta)

CAP Java supports the [VECTOR_EMBEDDING](https://help.sap.com/docs/hana-cloud-database/sap-hana-cloud-sap-hana-database-sql-reference-guide/vector-embedding-function-vector) function via `CQL.vectorEmbedding` to generate vector embeddings from text data directly in SAP HANA.

> To automatically generate vector embeddings on write in the database, you can use the `vector_embedding` function as calculated element [on-write](../../cds/cdl#on-write):

Author: ```suggestion
To automatically generate vector embeddings on write in the database, you can define a calculated element [on-write](../../cds/cdl#on-write) using the `vector_embedding` function:
```

```cds
extend Incidents with {
   embedding : cds.Vector(768) = vector_embedding(summary, 'DOCUMENT', 'SAP_GXY.20250407') stored;

> }

Author: ```suggestion
extend Incidents with {
  embedding : cds.Vector(768) = vector_embedding(
       summary, 'DOCUMENT', 'SAP_GXY.20250407') stored;
}
```

```Java
// Vector embedding of text, for example, from SAP GenAI Hub via SAP Cloud SDK for AI
float[] embedding = embeddingModel.embedding(
        new OpenAiEmbeddingRequest(List.of(text))).getEmbeddingVectors().get(0);

CdsVector v1 = CdsVector.of(embedding); // float[] format
```

In CDS QL queries, elements of type `cds.Vector` are not included in select _all_ queries. They must be explicitly added to the select list:

```Java
CdsVector embedding = service.run(Select.from(INCIDENTS).byId(101)
  .columns(b -> b.embedding())).single(Incident.class).getEmbedding();
```

### Computing Vector Embeddings in SAP HANA (beta)

CAP Java supports the [VECTOR_EMBEDDING](https://help.sap.com/docs/hana-cloud-database/sap-hana-cloud-sap-hana-database-sql-reference-guide/vector-embedding-function-vector) function via `CQL.vectorEmbedding` to generate vector embeddings from text data directly in SAP HANA.

To automatically generate vector embeddings on write in the database, you can define a calculated element [on-write](../../cds/cdl#on-write) using the `vector_embedding` function:

```cds
extend Incidents with {
  embedding : cds.Vector(768) = vector_embedding(

>        summary, 'DOCUMENT', 'SAP_GXY.20250407') stored;

Author: ```suggestion
       'title: "' || title || '", summary: ' || summary,
       'DOCUMENT', 'SAP_GXY.20250407') stored @cds.api.ignore;
```

Map data can be nested and may contain nested maps and lists, which are serialized to JSON objects and arrays, respectively.

## Vector Embeddings { #vector-embeddings }

### Vector Type

In CDS, [vector embeddings](../guides/databases/hana#vector-embeddings) are stored in elements of type `cds.Vector(length)`.

> CAP Java support the vector type on SAP HANA, Postgres (beta) with the [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector) extension, as well as H2 and SQLite for local testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CAP Java support the vector type on SAP HANA, as well as H2 and SQLite for local testing. On Postgres (beta) support for vectors requires the [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector) extension.
```

In CAP Java, vectors are represented by the `CdsVector` type, which allows a unified handling of different vector representations such as `float[]` and `String`:

```Java
// Vector embedding of text, for example, from SAP GenAI Hub via SAP Cloud SDK for AI
float[] embedding = embeddingModel.embedding(
        new OpenAiEmbeddingRequest(List.of(text))).getEmbeddingVectors().get(0);

CdsVector v1 = CdsVector.of(embedding); // float[] format
```

In CDS QL queries, elements of type `cds.Vector` are not included in select _all_ queries. They must be explicitly added to the select list:

```Java
CdsVector embedding = service.run(Select.from(INCIDENTS).byId(101)
  .columns(b -> b.embedding())).single(Incident.class).getEmbedding();
```

> ### Computing Vector Embeddings in SAP HANA (beta)

Author: ```suggestion
### Computing Vector Embeddings in SAP HANA <Beta />
```

CAP Java supports the [VECTOR_EMBEDDING](https://help.sap.com/docs/hana-cloud-database/sap-hana-cloud-sap-hana-database-sql-reference-guide/vector-embedding-function-vector) function via `CQL.vectorEmbedding` to generate vector embeddings from text data directly in SAP HANA.

To automatically generate vector embeddings on write in the database, you can define a calculated element [on-write](../../cds/cdl#on-write) using the `vector_embedding` function:

```cds
extend Incidents with {
  embedding : cds.Vector(768) = vector_embedding(
       'title: "' || title || '", summary: ' || summary,
       'DOCUMENT', 'SAP_GXY.20250407') stored @cds.api.ignore;
}
```

On H2 and SQLite the `vectorEmbedding` function is emulated using local [ONNX](https://onnx.ai) embedding models, which can be added for local testing via [LangChain4j embeddings](https://github.com/langchain4j/langchain4j/tree/main/embeddings):

```xml
<dependency>
   <groupId>dev.langchain4j</groupId>
   <artifactId>langchain4j-embeddings-all-minilm-l6-v2-q</artifactId>

>    <scope>test</scope>

Author: ```suggestion
   <scope>runtime</scope>
```
